---
title: Nameservers for the Address and Routing Parameter Area ("arpa") Domain
abbrev: Nameservers for the .arpa Domain
docname: draft-iana-arpa-authorities-99

stand_alone: true

ipr: trust200902
kw: Internet-Draft
cat: bcp

pi:
  toc: yes
  tocdepth: 4
  sortrefs: yes
  symrefs: yes
  
author:
  -
    ins: K. Davies
    name: Kim Davies
    org: Internet Assigned Numbers Authority
    abbrev: IANA
    street:
        - PTI/ICANN
        - 12025 Waterfront Drive
    city: Los Angeles
    code: 90094
    country: United States of America
    email: kim.davies@iana.org
  -
    ins: J. Arkko
    name: Jari Arkko
    org: Internet Architecture Board
    abbrev: IAB

    
normative:
  RFC3172:
informative:
  RFC5855:
  RFC7720:
  

--- abstract

This document describes revisions to operational practices to separate
function of the "arpa" top-level domain in the DNS from its historical
operation alongside the DNS root zone.

--- middle

# Introduction

This document separates the provision of authoritative service for
the "arpa" top-level domain zone from that of the root zone, allowing
for greater separation of concerns and thus more tailored operations
based on the unique requirements of each service.

The arpa top-level domain {{RFC3172}} is designated as
an "infrastructure domain" to support techniques defined by Internet
standards. Zones under the arpa domain provide various mappings,
such as E.164 numbers to URIs, and IP addresses to domain names. It
also contains special use names, such as "home", which is a non-unique
name used in residential home networks.

Historically, the arpa zone has been hosted on almost all
of the root name servers. {{RFC3172}} envisages the arpa domain to be
"sufficiently critical that the operational requirements for the root
servers apply to the operational requirements of the "arpa" servers".
To date, this has been implemented by serving the arpa domain directly
on a subset of the root server infrastructure.

This commingling of operations has caused complications. The resulting
co-dependency of these two zones have entwined management of both their
content and their infrastructure. For example, some proposals under
consideration in the IETF that involving the arpa zone have been discarded
due to the risk of conflict with root operations.

The proposed separation also resolves operational impacts of synchronizing edits
between the management of the root zone and the arpa zone. The current
dependency has unduly complicated the management systems and processes
for the root zone.

# Requirements for the "arpa" zone

The arpa domain continues to play a role in critical Internet
operations, and this change does not propose weakening operational
requirements described in {{RFC3172}} for the domain. Future operational
requirements for the arpa domain shall consider strong baseline requirements, such
as those documented in {{RFC7720}}.

# Transition Process

The process will dedicate new hostnames to the servers authoritative for
the arpa zone, but will initially serve the arpa zone from the same hosts.

Once completed, subsequent transitional phases would include using new hosts
to replace or augment the existing root server hosts, and separation
of the editing and distribution of the arpa zone from necessarily
being connected to the root zone.

## Dedicated nameserver hostnames

Consistent with the use of the arpa namespace itself to host name
servers for other delegations in the arpa zone ({{RFC5855}}), this
document specifies a new namespace of "ns.arpa", with the
nameserver set to be labelled as follows:

~~~~~
   a.ns.arpa
   b.ns.arpa
   c.ns.arpa
   ...
~~~~~

This eliminates a logical dependency that requires the coordinated editing of
the arpa zone and the root zone. This component of this transition does not
require the underlying hosts that provide arpa name service (that is, the
root servers) be altered. The arpa zone will initially map the new
hostnames to to the same IP addresses that already provide service under
the respective hostnames within root-servers.net.

## Separation of infrastructure

After initially migrating the arpa zone to use hostnames that are not shared
with the root zone, the underlying name service is expected to evolve such that
it no longer directly aligns to a subset of root server instances. Future novel
applications for the arpa zone may be pre-conditioned on ensuring there is no
shared infrastructure between the root servers and the arpa servers.

Any subequent changes to the parties providing name service
for the zone is considered a normal management responsibility associated
with zone management, and would be performed in accordance with {{RFC3172}}.

## Zone administration

Publication of the arpa zone file to the authoritative arpa name
servers is currently undertaken as part of the Root Zone Maintainer
contract performed under the auspices of ICANN. Upon the separation of
the arpa infrastructure from the root server infrastructure,
publication of the arpa zone no longer necessarily needs to be
linked or inter-related to the root zone publication mechanisms.

## Conclusion of process

Full compartmentalization of arpa operations from root operations
minimally requires the following to be satisfied:

* The arpa zone no longer shares any hostnames in its NS-set with the root
  zone;
  
* The hosts that provide authoritative name service are not the same hosts
  as the root servers, do not share any IPv4 or IPv6 addresses with the
  root servers, and are sufficiently separately provisioned such
  that any unique arpa zone requirements can be deployed without affecting
  how root zone service is provided;
  
* The editorial and publication process for the arpa zone has any common
  dependencies with the root zone process removed, so that the arpa zone 
  can be managed, edited and provisioned wholly independently of the
  root zone.
  
Such compartmentalization is ultimately sought to allow for novel uses of
the arpa zone without the risk of inadvertantly impacting root zone and root
server operations. It is recognized that achieving this state requires a
deliberative process involving significant coordination to ensure impacts
are minimized.

# IANA Considerations

The IANA shall coordinate the creation of a new "ns.arpa" zone and
populate it with address records that reflect the IP addresses of the
contemporary root servers documented within "root-servers.net" as its
initial state.

The IANA will initially migrate the 12 NS records for the arpa zone
to point to their respective new entries in the "ns.arpa" zone.

Subsequently, the IAB and IANA will consult and coordinate with all relevant
parties on activity to reduce or eliminate reliance upon root zone
and root server infrastructure for serving the arpa zone. Such
changes will be performed in compliance with {{RFC3172}} and shall
be conducted with all due care and deliberation to mitigate potential
impacts on critical infrastructure.

--- back

# Open Issues

* Should nameservers for ns.arpa be on the standard IANA infrastructure
  servers i.e. *.iana-servers.net? Are there any special considerations here
  that need to be documented?
  
* A preference has been expressed for non-.arpa hostnames. Is it better that the
  nameserver hostnames are in-bailiwick in .arpa or does that provide no
  benefit?
  
* Should the name servers stick to the same letter-based nomenclature as
  the root zone? Some operators have expressed a strong desire to move away
  from the letters for the root zone.
  
* Should the hostname change be staggered or can it be done in one
  action?

# Acknowledgments
{:numbered="false"}

Thank you Michelle Cotton, Ted Hardie, Paul Hoffman, Duane Wessels and
Suzanne Woolf for initial feedback.


